.agent/skills/nextjs-react-expert/4-client-client-side-data-fetching.md, before:

# 4. Client-Side Data Fetching

> **Impact:** MEDIUM-HIGH
> **Focus:** Automatic deduplication and efficient data fetching patterns reduce redundant network requests.

---

## Overview

This section contains **4 rules** focused on client-side data fetching.

---

## Rule 4.1: Deduplicate Global Event Listeners

**Impact:** LOW  
**Tags:** client, swr, event-listeners, subscription  

## Deduplicate Global Event Listeners

Use `useSWRSubscription()` to share global event listeners across component instances.

**Incorrect (N instances = N listeners):**

```tsx
function useKeyboardShortcut(key: string, callback: () => void) {
  useEffect(() => {
    const handler = (e: KeyboardEvent) => {
      if (e.metaKey && e.key === key) {
        callback()
      }
    }
    window.addEventListener('keydown', handler)
    return () => window.removeEventListener('keydown', handler)
  }, [key, callback])
}
```

When using the `useKeyboardShortcut` hook multiple times, each instance will register a new listener.

**Correct (N instances = 1 listener):**

```tsx
import useSWRSubscription from 'swr/subscription'

// Module-level Map to track callbacks per key
const keyCallbacks = new Map<string, Set<() => void>>()

function useKeyboardShortcut(key: string, callback: () => void) {
  // Register this callback in the Map
  useEffect(() => {
    if (!keyCallbacks.has(key)) {
      keyCallbacks.set(key, new Set())
    }
    keyCallbacks.get(key)!.add(callback)

    return () => {
      const set = keyCallbacks.get(key)
      if (set) {
        set.delete(callback)
        if (set.size === 0) {
          keyCallbacks.delete(key)
        }
      }
    }
  }, [key, callback])

  useSWRSubscription('global-keydown', () => {
    const handler = (e: KeyboardEvent) => {
      if (e.metaKey && keyCallbacks.has(e.key)) {
        keyCallbacks.get(e.key)!.forEach(cb => cb())
      }
    }
    window.addEventListener('keydown', handler)
    return () => window.removeEventListener('keydown', handler)
  })
}

function Profile() {
  // Multiple shortcuts will share the same listener
  useKeyboardShortcut('p', () => { /* ... */ }) 
  useKeyboardShortcut('k', () => { /* ... */ })
  // ...
}
```

---

## Rule 4.2: Use Passive Event Listeners for Scrolling Performance

**Impact:** MEDIUM  
**Tags:** client, event-listeners, scrolling, performance, touch, wheel  

## Use Passive Event Listeners for Scrolling Performance

Add `{ passive: true }` to touch and wheel event listeners to enable immediate scrolling. Browsers normally wait for listeners to finish to check if `preventDefault()` is called, causing scroll delay.

**Incorrect:**

```typescript
useEffect(() => {
  const handleTouch = (e: TouchEvent) => console.log(e.touches[0].clientX)
  const handleWheel = (e: WheelEvent) => console.log(e.deltaY)
  
  document.addEventListener('touchstart', handleTouch)
  document.addEventListener('wheel', handleWheel)
  
  return () => {
    document.removeEventListener('touchstart', handleTouch)
    document.removeEventListener('wheel', handleWheel)
  }
}, [])
```

**Correct:**

```typescript
useEffect(() => {
  const handleTouch = (e: TouchEvent) => console.log(e.touches[0].clientX)
  const handleWheel = (e: WheelEvent) => console.log(e.deltaY)
  
  document.addEventListener('touchstart', handleTouch, { passive: true })
  document.addEventListener('wheel', handleWheel, { passive: true })
  
  return () => {
    document.removeEventListener('touchstart', handleTouch)
    document.removeEventListener('wheel', handleWheel)
  }
}, [])
```

**Use passive when:** tracking/analytics, logging, any listener that doesn't call `preventDefault()`.

**Don't use passive when:** implementing custom swipe gestures, custom zoom controls, or any listener that needs `preventDefault()`.

---

## Rule 4.3: Use SWR for Automatic Deduplication

**Impact:** MEDIUM-HIGH  
**Tags:** client, swr, deduplication, data-fetching  

## Use SWR for Automatic Deduplication

SWR enables request deduplication, caching, and revalidation across component instances.

**Incorrect (no deduplication, each instance fetches):**

```tsx
function UserList() {
  const [users, setUsers] = useState([])
  useEffect(() => {
    fetch('/api/users')
      .then(r => r.json())
      .then(setUsers)
  }, [])
}
```

**Correct (multiple instances share one request):**

```tsx
import useSWR from 'swr'

function UserList() {
  const { data: users } = useSWR('/api/users', fetcher)
}
```

**For immutable data:**

```tsx
import { useImmutableSWR } from '@/lib/swr'

function StaticContent() {
  const { data } = useImmutableSWR('/api/config', fetcher)
}
```

**For mutations:**

```tsx
import { useSWRMutation } from 'swr/mutation'

function UpdateButton() {
  const { trigger } = useSWRMutation('/api/user', updateUser)
  return <button onClick={() => trigger()}>Update</button>
}
```

Reference: [https://swr.vercel.app](https://swr.vercel.app)

---

## Rule 4.4: Version and Minimize localStorage Data

**Impact:** MEDIUM  
**Tags:** client, localStorage, storage, versioning, data-minimization  

## Version and Minimize localStorage Data

Add version prefix to keys and store only needed fields. Prevents schema conflicts and accidental storage of sensitive data.

**Incorrect:**

```typescript
// No version, stores everything, no error handling
localStorage.setItem('userConfig', JSON.stringify(fullUserObject))
const data = localStorage.getItem('userConfig')
```

**Correct:**

```typescript
const VERSION = 'v2'

function saveConfig(config: { theme: string; language: string }) {
  try {
    localStorage.setItem(`userConfig:${VERSION}`, JSON.stringify(config))
  } catch {
    // Throws in incognito/private browsing, quota exceeded, or disabled
  }
}

function loadConfig() {
  try {
    const data = localStorage.getItem(`userConfig:${VERSION}`)
    return data ? JSON.parse(data) : null
  } catch {
    return null
  }
}

// Migration from v1 to v2
function migrate() {
  try {
    const v1 = localStorage.getItem('userConfig:v1')
    if (v1) {
      const old = JSON.parse(v1)
      saveConfig({ theme: old.darkMode ? 'dark' : 'light', language: old.lang })
      localStorage.removeItem('userConfig:v1')
    }
  } catch {}
}
```

**Store minimal fields from server responses:**

```typescript
// User object has 20+ fields, only store what UI needs
function cachePrefs(user: FullUser) {
  try {
    localStorage.setItem('prefs:v1', JSON.stringify({
      theme: user.preferences.theme,
      notifications: user.preferences.notifications
    }))
  } catch {}
}
```

**Always wrap in try-catch:** `getItem()` and `setItem()` throw in incognito/private browsing (Safari, Firefox), when quota exceeded, or when disabled.

**Benefits:** Schema evolution via versioning, reduced storage size, prevents storing tokens/PII/internal flags.

Commit message:

docs: Add database design and client-side data fetching guidelines, including project-specific strategies and best practices.

.agent/skills/nextjs-react-expert/4-client-client-side-data-fetching.md, after:

# 4. Client-Side Data Fetching

> **Impact:** MEDIUM-HIGH
> **Focus:** Automatic deduplication and efficient data fetching patterns reduce redundant network requests.

---

## Overview

This section contains **4 rules** focused on client-side data fetching.

---

## Rule 4.1: Deduplicate Global Event Listeners

**Impact:** LOW  
**Tags:** client, swr, event-listeners, subscription  

## Deduplicate Global Event Listeners

Use `useSWRSubscription()` to share global event listeners across component instances.

**Incorrect (N instances = N listeners):**

```tsx
function useKeyboardShortcut(key: string, callback: () => void) {
  useEffect(() => {
    const handler = (e: KeyboardEvent) => {
      if (e.metaKey && e.key === key) {
        callback()
      }
    }
    window.addEventListener('keydown', handler)
    return () => window.removeEventListener('keydown', handler)
  }, [key, callback])
}
```

When using the `useKeyboardShortcut` hook multiple times, each instance will register a new listener.

**Correct (N instances = 1 listener):**

```tsx
import useSWRSubscription from 'swr/subscription'

// Module-level Map to track callbacks per key
const keyCallbacks = new Map<string, Set<() => void>>()

function useKeyboardShortcut(key: string, callback: () => void) {
  // Register this callback in the Map
  useEffect(() => {
    if (!keyCallbacks.has(key)) {
      keyCallbacks.set(key, new Set())
    }
    keyCallbacks.get(key)!.add(callback)

    return () => {
      const set = keyCallbacks.get(key)
      if (set) {
        set.delete(callback)
        if (set.size === 0) {
          keyCallbacks.delete(key)
        }
      }
    }
  }, [key, callback])

  useSWRSubscription('global-keydown', () => {
    const handler = (e: KeyboardEvent) => {
      if (e.metaKey && keyCallbacks.has(e.key)) {
        keyCallbacks.get(e.key)!.forEach(cb => cb())
      }
    }
    window.addEventListener('keydown', handler)
    return () => window.removeEventListener('keydown', handler)
  })
}

function Profile() {
  // Multiple shortcuts will share the same listener
  useKeyboardShortcut('p', () => { /* ... */ }) 
  useKeyboardShortcut('k', () => { /* ... */ })
  // ...
}
```

---

## Rule 4.2: Use Passive Event Listeners for Scrolling Performance

**Impact:** MEDIUM  
**Tags:** client, event-listeners, scrolling, performance, touch, wheel  

## Use Passive Event Listeners for Scrolling Performance

Add `{ passive: true }` to touch and wheel event listeners to enable immediate scrolling. Browsers normally wait for listeners to finish to check if `preventDefault()` is called, causing scroll delay.

**Incorrect:**

```typescript
useEffect(() => {
  const handleTouch = (e: TouchEvent) => console.log(e.touches[0].clientX)
  const handleWheel = (e: WheelEvent) => console.log(e.deltaY)
  
  document.addEventListener('touchstart', handleTouch)
  document.addEventListener('wheel', handleWheel)
  
  return () => {
    document.removeEventListener('touchstart', handleTouch)
    document.removeEventListener('wheel', handleWheel)
  }
}, [])
```

**Correct:**

```typescript
useEffect(() => {
  const handleTouch = (e: TouchEvent) => console.log(e.touches[0].clientX)
  const handleWheel = (e: WheelEvent) => console.log(e.deltaY)
  
  document.addEventListener('touchstart', handleTouch, { passive: true })
  document.addEventListener('wheel', handleWheel, { passive: true })
  
  return () => {
    document.removeEventListener('touchstart', handleTouch)
    document.removeEventListener('wheel', handleWheel)
  }
}, [])
```

**Use passive when:** tracking/analytics, logging, any listener that doesn't call `preventDefault()`.

**Don't use passive when:** implementing custom swipe gestures, custom zoom controls, or any listener that needs `preventDefault()`.

**- Use clear loading states
- Handle errors gracefully
- Consider using a library like SWR or React Query

---

## 🕋 Project-Specific Data Fetching: Hadith & Hadith-QA

For this project, follow these optimized fetching patterns:

### 1. Hadith Retrieval (Static)
Hadiths are largely static and should be fetched from Redis or directly from Prisma with a high cache TTL.
- **Server-side**: Use `prisma.hadith.findUnique` with `include` for collections.
- **Client-side**: Fetch via API route that implements the Redis caching strategy mentioned in `@[skills/api-patterns/response]`.

### 2. Hadith-QA Search (Dynamic)
QA search should prioritize responsiveness and relevance.
- **Implementation**: Use the pre-computed `searchTerms` field in `HadithQA` for faster partial matches.
- **Optimization**: Debounce search inputs on the client to reduce API pressure and cache common search result hashes in Redis.

---

## Rule 4.3: Use SWR for Automatic Deduplication

**Impact:** MEDIUM-HIGH  
**Tags:** client, swr, deduplication, data-fetching  

## Use SWR for Automatic Deduplication

SWR enables request deduplication, caching, and revalidation across component instances.

**Incorrect (no deduplication, each instance fetches):**

```tsx
function UserList() {
  const [users, setUsers] = useState([])
  useEffect(() => {
    fetch('/api/users')
      .then(r => r.json())
      .then(setUsers)
  }, [])
}
```

**Correct (multiple instances share one request):**

```tsx
import useSWR from 'swr'

function UserList() {
  const { data: users } = useSWR('/api/users', fetcher)
}
```

**For immutable data:**

```tsx
import { useImmutableSWR } from '@/lib/swr'

function StaticContent() {
  const { data } = useImmutableSWR('/api/config', fetcher)
}
```

**For mutations:**

```tsx
import { useSWRMutation } from 'swr/mutation'

function UpdateButton() {
  const { trigger } = useSWRMutation('/api/user', updateUser)
  return <button onClick={() => trigger()}>Update</button>
}
```

Reference: [https://swr.vercel.app](https://swr.vercel.app)

---

## Rule 4.4: Version and Minimize localStorage Data

**Impact:** MEDIUM  
**Tags:** client, localStorage, storage, versioning, data-minimization  

## Version and Minimize localStorage Data

Add version prefix to keys and store only needed fields. Prevents schema conflicts and accidental storage of sensitive data.

**Incorrect:**

```typescript
// No version, stores everything, no error handling
localStorage.setItem('userConfig', JSON.stringify(fullUserObject))
const data = localStorage.getItem('userConfig')
```

**Correct:**

```typescript
const VERSION = 'v2'

function saveConfig(config: { theme: string; language: string }) {
  try {
    localStorage.setItem(`userConfig:${VERSION}`, JSON.stringify(config))
  } catch {
    // Throws in incognito/private browsing, quota exceeded, or disabled
  }
}

function loadConfig() {
  try {
    const data = localStorage.getItem(`userConfig:${VERSION}`)
    return data ? JSON.parse(data) : null
  } catch {
    return null
  }
}

// Migration from v1 to v2
function migrate() {
  try {
    const v1 = localStorage.getItem('userConfig:v1')
    if (v1) {
      const old = JSON.parse(v1)
      saveConfig({ theme: old.darkMode ? 'dark' : 'light', language: old.lang })
      localStorage.removeItem('userConfig:v1')
    }
  } catch {}
}
```

**Store minimal fields from server responses:**

```typescript
// User object has 20+ fields, only store what UI needs
function cachePrefs(user: FullUser) {
  try {
    localStorage.setItem('prefs:v1', JSON.stringify({
      theme: user.preferences.theme,
      notifications: user.preferences.notifications
    }))
  } catch {}
}
```

**Always wrap in try-catch:** `getItem()` and `setItem()` throw in incognito/private browsing (Safari, Firefox), when quota exceeded, or when disabled.

**Benefits:** Schema evolution via versioning, reduced storage size, prevents storing tokens/PII/internal flags.
